[Music]
part three the national security
Colossus 1939 through 75 the calendar
recorded the completion of a decade but
the events of 1939 would mark the
passage of an era the world stood
watching transfixed by what Winston
Churchill called The Gathering Storm
awaiting the final climactic acts and
what he described as another 30 Years
War footnote 4 Churchill's own account
of events leading to the outbreak of
World War two see Winston s Churchill
The Gathering Storm Boston hotend
Mifflin company 1948 end footnote
Hitler had been tolerated Der Fuhrer had
been appeased and then with the invasion
of Poland on 1st day of September the
aggression of Nazism had to be halted
while England supported by the British
Empire was destined to be Germany's
primary opponent for two years prior to
American entry into the European
hostilities His Majesty's Government had
only recently come to a wartime posture
production of modern fighter aircraft
the Spitfire and hurricane types had not
gotten underway until 1937 it has been
estimated that in 1938 and the initial
months of 1939 quote Germany
manufactured at least double and
possibly tripled the munitions of
Britain and France put together and also
that her great plants for tank
production reached full capacity
end quote conscription was not affected
in the United Kingdom until April 1939
Churchill did not form a government
until May 1940 approximately nine months
after the declaration of war the British
did have some advantages one of them
being the development and deployment of
radio direction-finding techniques or
radar experimental stations were erected
in March 1936 for aircraft detection and
efforts were also made to
tract ships at sea utilizing this device
according to Churchill quote by 1939 the
Air Ministry using comparatively long
wave radio 10 metres had constructed the
so-called coastal chain which enabled us
to detect aircraft approaching over the
sea at distances up to about 60 miles an
elaborate network of telephonic
communication had been installed under
Air Marshal doubting of Fighter Command
linking all these stations with a
central command station at Oxbridge
where the movements of all aircraft
observed could be plotted on large maps
and thus the control in action of all
our own air forces maintained apparatus
called iff identification Friend or Foe
had also been devised which enabled our
coastal chain radar stations to
distinguish British aircraft which
carried it from enemy aircraft it was
found that these long wave stations did
not detect aircraft approaching at low
heights over the sea and as a counter to
this danger a supplementary set of
stations called CHL chain stations home
service low cover was constructed using
much shorter waves one and a half metres
but only effective over a short range
end quote in June 1938 Churchill was
introduced to another detection
technique the a stiix quote the name
which described the system of groping
for submarines below the surface by
means of sound waves through the water
which echo back from any steel structure
they met
end quote this process also stood ready
for application at the time when open
warfare erupted on the continent but
while these technological innovations
would soon be replicated by Germany
Britain obtained one inestimable
Intelligence advantage over the Nazis
which has only recently been publicly
revealed in 1938 through the
intervention of a Polish mechanic just
fired from the production facility in
eastern Germany British intelligence
learned that the Nazis were developing
an improved Enigma mechanical cipher
process soon the Polish Secret Service
proved successful in purloining one of
the machines by the eve of war the
British had mastered the operation of
the device and its resultant code
simultaneously Germany unaware of the
British intelligence advantage but the
new Enigma process into service and
utilised it all during the war
footnote further details on the breaking
of the German code and its use during
the war
may be found in fw Winterbotham the
ultra street new york Harper & row 1974
and footnote
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you